poverty is the norm wealth the exception
with us today a man who has written a
book to remind us of that fact dr.
thomas sol on uncommon knowledge now
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson Thomas soul has taught
economics intellectual history and
social policy at institutions such as
Cornell UCLA and Amherst the author of
more than a dozen books well over a
dozen books dr. Sol is now a senior
fellow of the Hoover Institution at
Stanford University his latest work
wealth poverty and politics and
international perspective Tom Sola
welcome I could be here the big idea
wealth poverty in politics quote the
difference between seeing economic
disparities is due to differences in the
production of wealth and seeing those
disparities as due to the transfer of
wealth from some people to other people
is fundamental explain that well I think
there are a lot of people who regard
so-called disparities and inequities and
income as something that requires some
great explanation seem to assume that in
the absence of some intervention
everyone would have something roughly
equal income virtually everything that
goes into the production of income
varies enormously between groups between
nations
between people on the on the flat lands
the people in the mountains you name it
it varies it varies and I take it
correct me if I'm wrong about this but
as I was reading this I take it as one
of the principal efforts of this book to
correct the thinking of Americans who
have grown up most of us in conditions
that by the standards of human history
and by the standards of many other
places on the globe today would be
conditions of almost staggering wealth
yes even poor people in this country
have smartphones televisions cars and so
forth and we tend to assume it may be
human nature we ten
assume that our conditions are normal
and conditions that differ from ours are
the anomaly okay and this book says no
no no well good heavens especially if
you look back through time really is
though it's only within the last five or
ten percent of the existence of human
beings that there has been a great
culture I mean I think what that means
that people had to feed themselves
hunting hunting and gathering fishing
herding animals but and of course that
meant that you couldn't have cities
because you for all those other ways of
living you need an enormous amount of
land per person if you were to cut one
Manhattan would probably be enough you
know to spread famine throughout the
world so that I start with geography
because that's the most implacable
obstacle and geography is nowhere
anywhere close to being normal for
example just geographic phenomena in the
great majority of all the tornadoes in
the entire world occur in the middle of
the United States you don't hear about
tornadoes in London or Paris or Beijing
and you don't hear about them in New
York or San Francisco for that matter
that just in one little place in the
world all the conditions are there for a
to a NATO ally as true with so many
other things
nothing is evenly spread out there are
rivers and on every continent but the
rivers aren't the same let me I was
especially struck let me give you this
here's a quotation from the book Western
Europe's rivers often lead out into open
seas providing access to seaports around
the world but most rivers in eastern and
southern Europe are quite different yes
what's the difference in what what
boring is that that had on economic
develop well the the rivers in Eastern
Europe tend to flow enters into lakes
and inland seas and so when you when you
get to the end of the Danube or the dawn
you are not out in the open ocean you
know your xeu a that's right and then if
you want to get to the Atlantic you have
to go to the entire length of the
Mediterranean to get out there
the rivers in Russia most of those empty
into the Arctic Ocean which is not quite
as convenient as the Atlantic or the
Pacific and what that means is that you
can't have the Commerce you can't have
industry and whatnot
to the same extent that you have more
importantly you're not connected with
the rest of the human race to the same
extent and one of the one of the major
findings I threw out the book is that
isolation almost invariably means
poverty and backwardness in the
mountains yes if you live in Eastern
Europe or Russia and you're cut off from
the rest of the world
isolation leads in fact well we'll get
to this in a moment but it seems even to
have an effect on cognitive ability
prolonged isolation oh sure well
certainly in terms of not just shared
knowledge you don't have the same
knowledge but more than that you're not
aware of what how the basic things of
life are done differently in other parts
of the world and so people who are
isolated will keep doing things for
centuries or thousands of years so for
example when when when the British
landed in Australia they finally the
Australian Aborigines a living really a
Stone Age level
similarly when people from Europe got
came to the Canary Islands the same
thing they they had no idea of iron in
Australia they were they had no idea
Ryan it's one of the great sources of
iron ore in the world staying with
geography for a moment again one of the
themes that seems to me to run through
the book is this question of your
resistance to notions of - attempting to
pose to impose notions of morality on
economic conditions so for example with
geography some people happen to be born
in Western Europe where the rivers lead
to the sea and some people happen to be
born in Russia where some rivers lead to
the frozen Arctic and some rivers lead
to the Black Sea and it's nobody's fault
yeah it's luck yes or-or-or sure
happenstance
nobody's robbed
anybody else yes as one economic
historian said you know the world has
never been a level playing field
all right cultural factors another one
of the large segments of the book
let me quote to you again wealth poverty
and politics quote without the cultural
prerequisites for developing natural
resources into real wealth the raw
physical resources themselves are of
little or no value
close quote tell us what you mean by
cultural prerequisites plotly that would
be simply the knowledge of how to use
things as I mentioned in the book the
main difference between us and the
caveman is simply human capital
don't forget the caveman had all the all
the natural resources we have today and
he had them in greater abundance because
none of them had ever been used up but
but he didn't have what the knowledge
that it would take to turn those to his
own purposes we just know more yeah with
just no more now you note that you know
to certain productive capacity that
certain cultural groups demonstrate and
you can see them because they
demonstrate this certain the same let's
call it industriousness as they disperse
to different parts of the world yeah
Germans Chinese Lebanese Jews Indians
quote the productivity is a matter of
culture that productivity is a matter of
culture is shown by how many groups have
arrived in various countries far poorer
than the existing population and have
nevertheless risen above the economic
level of those who are there before them
close quote let's just choose a plus you
name a lot of groups it's a big book let
me just give you one at you and see how
you do he oversees Chinese oh my
goodness the overseas Chinese us settled
largely in Southeast Asia many of them
came there with little more than the
clothes on their backs uh there was one
Chinese millionaire and one in one of
the countries who had in the
the 48 of his mansion this stick with a
with a little claw thing tied to it
because he walked into in the end of
this place with that stick all his
belongings in this little cloth being
tied to us they stick over his shoulder
and he took off from there all right
the Jews oh my how that's been in so
many places my gosh the the Lower East
Side of New York one of the most
terrible places when the Jews landed the
the poverty and squalor is just
unbelievable
in fact even his latest was the nineteen
late 1940s when I went to school on the
Lower East Side I'd always heard that
all Jews were rich and when I saw the
Lower East Side is it why are these rich
people living like this the buildings on
the Lower East Side were older and in
worse conditions than the buildings in
Harlem where I lived and they don't live
there anymore
no as neighborhoods have turned over yes
and it went by generation to generation
it was their first even when they rose
up to where they could have moved they
didn't because many of them were not
fluent in English and so on and so you
could live on the Lower East Side
knowing only Yiddish and find doctors
lawyers anything you wanted going to
stores and so forth and and if you moved
up to upscale places like Harlem which
was once Jewish one of the arts of the
Bronx which at another time but which
became Hewish you would lose that the
more acculturated people the next
generation who spoke English and were
more familiar with American society they
lived in those kinds of places got it
so why is it that in many instances that
you detail you get a subgroup the
Chinese move to Fiji and why is it then
that so often we see the pattern that
not that the indigenous but the people
who were there first and fail to get
with the program and in to the contrary
not only do they not get with the
program learning the skills of
productivity
they tend again and again and again
to persecute mmm the groups that came
with nothing but achieve a certain level
of affluence so we have the juice pert
that's an old story ancient story the
persecution of the Jews but you also
show it with the overseas Chinese and
Malaysia with Indians in East Africa and
on and on it goes what's going on there
but well one thing there's no there's no
particular reason to have expected that
indigenous people to acquired the same
skills that the people who came there at
I'm worse yet the leaders of these
groups are very quick to blame the fact
that they're lagging on the other groups
were more advanced one of the phrase
that you often hear that this group took
over this whole industry and in many
cases there was no such engines free
until they came there and built it they
did not take it over right right so
those are industry those are examples of
the way culture can promote or enable
economic productivity you also provide a
counter example the Soviet Union quote
the Soviet Union was almost a
tailor-made refutation of Geographic
determinism explain that although the
Soviet Union was one of the most richly
supplied countries with natural
resources and probably the most richly
surprised supply it was the only
industrial nation which has so much
petroleum that they export oil right
they have some I don't remember
don't remember the fat the fraction but
they have a substantial part of the
world's supply of natural gas which they
are now supplying all over Europe iron
or manganese you name it they had it at
one time something like haften the
industrial diamonds in the world came
from the Soviet Union the land was so
rich that went in when Hitler sent his
army in to invade the Soviet Union
during World War two he had plans to
have the railroads take back this land
from from Russia into Germany because it
was that well known for its accumulation
the topsoil he was yes Long's cars of
top so that's right
right I didn't it's one of the most
frayed old sections of the and the irony
is one of the world's great famines
occurred in the Soviet Union how come
mismanagement by the government the one
treatment once said that if if if the
government took over the Sahara Desert
there would be a shortage of sand and
the Soviet Union it would it was just
that way all right more on social
factors I'm quoting again from wealth
poverty and politics
this is tricky ground there is empirical
evidence against against genetic
determinism we're talking about IQ
scores now for example there have been
whole communities of whites from
isolated mountain regions in America
whose average IQs have been similar to
or lower than the average IQs of black
Americans but while such evidence
undermines genetic determinism that does
not make mental tests differences
irrelevant so we're not genetically
determined mmm but disparities among
ethnic and racial groups are still worth
noting still consequential how do we put
this no no it what you're seldom hiring
a whole group or admitting a whole group
of college what you're doing is judging
individuals and the predictive validity
is really a totally separate question
from the question of a genetics versus
environment C in other words if the IQ
test does not have a single question
about flying an airplane and you give it
to people who want to become pilots the
only real question is do the scores on
those tests correlate with the
subsequent performance of people in the
air right but you see that I mean it's
it sounds so simple when you say it that
way but the Supreme Court of the United
States had a totally different take that
the employer must validate a test that
is that is not job-related and so what
they're saying is it's a question of
whether this test seems plausible to
third parties who have neither expertise
nor experience on the job and that will
be the criterion for whether it's a good
test
stay on this subjective genetics race
snick groups and so forth you talk again
in wealth poverty politics you describe
three very selectively their public high
schools in New York but they're very
selective um to test to get into them
that's Stuyvesant High you're Stuyvesant
High Bronx Science in Brooklyn Tech
quote the triumph of egalitarian
principles and demographic diversity in
the rest of New York's educational
system has not resulted in an increase
in the number or proportion of black or
Hispanic students passing the admissions
tests to get into Stuyvesant Bronx
Science in Brooklyn Tech on the contrary
the numbers and proportions of black and
Hispanic students have declined
substantially over the years at all
three institutions close quotes so
telegram to mayor de Blasio as diversity
becomes championed in the city of New
York over the last 40 years 50 years and
diversity actually diminishes at these
very selective high schools why well
it's that right the diversity really
doesn't do anything for you
there are many cultural doesn't do
anything for you as a society or I'm
sorry
as a society or the people in whose
interest you're you're promoting
diversity in other words when black
Hispanic kids go to schools other than
those three they get a load of diversity
it doesn't do them any good for example
as of about twenty twelve or twenty
fourteen I forget the exact one the
percentage of blacks at Stuyvesant High
School was one tenth of what it was
thirty three years earlier so it's been
a major retrogression and so while
they're being taught being heads full of
diversity the asian students are
learning math and science plus the
schools are also uh another point
against diversity is that in years past
those schools were so heavily Jewish
that Stuyvesant was referred to once as
a was a free pre prep school for Jews
well they weren't diverse but it was
very successful and now
asian-americans outnumber whites by more
than two to one and all three of those
schools it's still not diverse but
they're turning out people who do
marvelous things and that's what they
are there for to benefit the society not
to present this tableau that will please
a handful of people got it
all right political factors this is the
last of the large factors you discuss in
wealth poverty and politics quote black
Americans a group often identified as
beneficiaries of the welfare state in
America made considerable economic
progress in the 20th century fine of
course but much if not most this is the
thing with you the dependent clause is
where the stain is but much if not most
of this progress was prior to the
massive expansion of the American
welfare state close quote
that is so counter I want to say
counterintuitive because we hear so much
about African American progress and
civil rights and the establishment of
the welfare state that it really has
become a kind of American intuition
explain yourself dr. Sol well as of 1940
87 percent of black households were in
poverty over the next 20 years that
declined to 47% this is all prior to the
civil rights laws prior to the social
welfare policies of the Johnson
administration over the next 20 years it
fell an additional 18 points but that
was not that that was just the same
trend continuing at a reduced rate
affirmative action is even worse because
as I remember the precise oh I'm trying
to think now the numbers I think it was
something like poverty rate was
something like 30 percent among black
households before firmers actions and a
decade after affirmative action it was
29 percent this is not the same as the
forty percent decline that occurred
before there were any civil rights laws
and before there was any social welfare
state and so what happened between 1940
and 1960 was the post Second World War
economic boom it was that but it was
that what it was also the mass
of migration of blacks out of the south
so they're getting better education and
jobs that's right okay
now you mentioned cultural and social
retro aggressions again I'm quoting you
arguably the most consequential of these
was the decline in two-parent families
yeah it was quote explained that one
among African America yes we're still
talking about African what yeah well
when they talk about things like this
they talk about the legacy of slavery
right right and and and I argue well
empirically it's not that it's the
legacy of the welfare state because as
of 1960 which is almost a hundred years
after slavery ended the majority of
black kids were being raised in
two-parent households but within one
generation after the welfare state that
had dropped down to a minority so that
the majority of black kids today are
raised in one parent households when you
think about it I mean a centuries of
slavery and generations of Jim Crow did
not destroy the black family but when
one generation of the welfare state did
the Moynihan report what was it a call
for national action yeah the Negro the
Negro family a call for national action
in 1965 and fifty years ago and his
principle point of alarm and again now
I'm trying to recall the statistics but
I believe the out of wedlock birth rate
among African Americans in 1965 was
twenty five percent something like that
yeah and he was so alarmed that he wrote
this report and today it's over seventy
percent and by the way the rate among
whites is over one-third at this stage
yes so how do these how does the family
breakdown fit into an economic
understanding is it simply it's the
social breakdown of the American family
is something that we have to understand
aside from the tools of economics it
just doesn't fit into supply and well so
now this is this occurred at a time when
the black income was rising
and so we're saying that previous
generation of blacks with lower income
and more racial barriers stuck to the
family stuck together under those
conditions and under the new conditions
which were advertised to make for great
progress in fact created retrogression
and I think many people who were gung ho
for the idea of this was going to be
progress simply cannot bring themselves
to look at the evidence and say my god
we made things worse you close the book
with the chapter entitled implications
and prospects quote the all-too-familiar
cliche about the paradox of poverty in
an affluent society we're going from
international comparisons to this
country now the paradox of poverty in an
affluent society is a paradox only to
those who start with one a preconception
of an egalitarian world in defiance of
history and to a disregard of the
arbitrary nature of the government
defined word poverty now we've already
discussed point one you've already
established that historically speaking
poverty is the norm and there's nothing
like a Galit arianism it's spotty
particular economic progress is is
surprising in some ways number two the
arbitrary nature of the government
defined word poverty what do you mean by
that I mean if what what we define is
poverty today there was a Latin American
scholar a scholar of Latin America he's
not an American himself was saying that
what we define is poverty here is the
upper-middle class in Mexico
most Americans families in poverty as
defined by the statisticians in
Washington and that's the thing I try to
bring out regardless of what we think of
when we think of poverty what it really
means is whatever those statisticians
say it means and and that includes a the
great majority of people who are in
poverty in the United States by that
definition they have microwave ovens
they have they have central air
conditioning I mean I was in my 40s
before I had a window air conditioner
you know but the idea of centrally
air-conditioned most
own an automotive vehicle or more and
14% owned two or more motor vehicles
probably it is simply not poverty not by
any historical understand no whatsoever
no the and in the old days particularly
thinking about the lower Eastside when
the Jews live there you know that the
popular the people were squeezed
together in these tiny places today the
average American in poverty has more
space per person than the average
European not the average poor European
the average European period and so all
those things by which we've spoken of
poverty in the past those things have
long since gone but the other part of
this story is that that doesn't mean
they've got it made on the contrary they
have catastrophic problems because the
same mindset that has created the
welfare state the same non-judgemental
philosophy is also led to a great deal
of leniency toward criminals and so you
have runaway crime and people are living
in fear I'm sure that when I was growing
up that we we never had any of the stuff
that people are on welfare have today
but you know I could really hold on
let's just test that
you grew up as I recall late adolescence
to high school you were in Harlem yes
television in the house oh my god no
radio we thought we were a big deal we
had radio a car oh my never crossed my
mind when you're a little boy going to
school how many pairs of trousers did
you have I don't know I only wore one at
a time so but you weren't getting j.crew
or LL Bean catalog oh they were not they
must have overlooked me somehow you
weren't in the right zip code what about
what about a Wailord hungry though you
were still well-fed yeah but but you
know you mentioned about LL Bean my
sister was visiting me from from the
East Coast once was that you know people
in the ghetto would not write where the
kind of khakis you wear I said what's
wrong I got these uh Dockers and what
was wrong with no they want designer
things I hear about the the tennis shoes
that are bought there I mean I wouldn't
be that kind of money for regular shoes
did you have enough money for books in
the house
no I but fortunately I lived across the
street from a public library but but
other but other than that I don't know
if I ever bought a book when I was
growing up newspapers though newspapers
by the way was it considered oh dear how
do I say this there's a place in your
book where you talk about cultural
retrogression cultural retrogression
against among African Americans and
certain kinds of behavior call acting
white acting white was it acting white
in your day to go across the street to
the library nobody ever said it okay
alright so I'm sorry but you said you
didn't have any of the things that
supposedly poor people have today
you were making a point and then I
jumped in and started but but of course
i-i-i-i-i-i-i-i-i-i-i-i had a sense of
security that you simply cannot have and
if you look particularly at the public
housing of your name is safe that's yes
okay I mean I I can remember more than
once waking up at midnight and deciding
I will go out and buy a newspaper to see
how this place what the baseball scores
are and so out and the guy who was who
was selling them was a very small
elderly white man down down at the end
of the block okay today both of us would
be taken into custody and sent Enfamil
observation for being out there in the
middle of the night so poverty in
America today is not material want you
know simply is not by the standards of
all time yet all history other places
that is not material one it's poverty of
the mind it's poverty of policy its
quality of squalor of behavior and how
does that get corrected thus far it
hasn't been one of the real problems and
this is this is not peculiar to the
United States or to any group in America
ethnic leaders particularly leaders of
groups that are lagging or a major
obstacle to advancement because there's
self-interest isn't keeping their group
isolated and an isolation has been tied
in with poverty for all kinds of groups
and all kinds of settings around the
world
al Sharpton vs. Ben Carson yes al
Sharpton is is bad for African Americans
yes that's what you said yes but
unfortunately out the al Sharpton types
have been the rule rather than
exceptions with groups around the world
back back in the 19th century Bohemia
where the Germans again for a whole lot
of how do you know all this because of
my research assistants all right go
ahead 19th century Bohemia the Germans
had had all kinds of advantages that
came out of history we could go into if
you felt like it uh but for example if
you were an earth and the freight and
the early 19th century Bohemia and you
wanted to go to high school and uh and
you were a check you would have to learn
German because there were no high
schools in the Czech language until 1848
and so that but that was a condition
common throughout Eastern Europe that
the Slavic languages became literate
centuries after the German language did
and therefore there was a huge buildup
of knowledge in the German language it
was not equally available in Slavic
languages at that time and so if anyone
who wanted to become an educated person
going to the professions they had to
learn German now you would think that
then that the leaders if they were
looking out for the best interest of
their followers would say for heaven's
sake learns revered and move on up no
they would have they would they fought
tooth and nail against it dr. Sol and
his critics from a review of wealth
poverty and politics in the Washington
Post now I'm going to just I don't want
you to swing at me alright soul does
manage to score a clean hit on those who
now complain that income inequality is
too high by noting their refusal to say
what level of inequality inequality they
would consider acceptable fair enough
what we also learn in this book however
is that there is apparently no level of
inequality of income
opportunity that Thomas soul would
consider unacceptable a close quote and
you reply well it's it's hard to know
where to begin when someone misses the
whole point of the whole book of course
the big confusion among the
redistributionist
is between opportunity and outcomes and
when one of the examples I use in a
recent column was it you know well now
when I was a kid I briefly tried to play
basketball and I mean I was lucky they
hit the backboard nevermind the basket
you know but I had just as much
opportunity to play basketball as
Michael Jordan had you cannot measure
opportunity by outcomes and that's what
the redistribution is insist on doing
they say this group obviously that
didn't didn't have equal opportunity
because they were turned down for loans
more so than that group yes if you have
lower credit scores you'll be turned
down for loans more so than people with
high credit scores okay Thomas you just
mentioned a column let's let's let's
turn to the politics of the day for a
moment
Thomas olan Donald Trump quote what is
remarkable is that after six years of
repeated disasters under a glib
egomaniac in the White House so many
potential voters are turning to another
glib egomaniac to be his successor close
quote
oh come on aren't you being a little
hard on both Barack Obama and Donald
Trump I thought I was pulling my punches
Donald Trump is simply not suited to be
President I think that that's true as an
understatement all right but run or is
the current I was going to say Barack
Obama is the president yes
glib ego mean how bad has he been who
where does Barack Obama rank in your
mind you who know so much history among
would the worst American presidents
he has displaced Jimmy Carter from that
position the worst the worst worse than
James Buchanan yes
worse than Richard Nixon yes all right
Richard Nixon did not after all put us
in danger
of nuclear attacks probably win the
lifetime of people living today the Iran
deal will do that
yes we're committed to stopping the
Israelis from stopping the Iranians from
getting a nuclear weapon that's part of
the deal when I interviewed George
Gilder about six or seven months ago
George Gilder known to both of us he
contended that with the right policies
the economy coming back to the
international scene in a moment but the
economy would actually turn around quite
quickly the American economy can be
revived quite quickly cut taxes peel
back regulation and you'd see another
version of the early 1980s you agree yes
all we have to do is get out of the way
in a certain sense yes I mean there was
that when when Warren Harding took
office in 1921 the unemployment rate was
around 12% Warren Harding did absolutely
nothing as the as the government's
revenue fell because of the downturn he
cut government spending but now both
those things are things that the kid the
Keynesian is crazy right the following
year
unemployment had fallen to about half
that level within a year yes and then a
year after that it fell yet again people
you know there is a history it the first
time the federal government intervened
in the economy to get us out of a
downturn was in 1930 now which means
that for more than 150 years the federal
government just stood by and twiddle
their thumbs while the economy recovered
on its own and all that time there was
never a depression as bad as the 1930s
depression where there was all kinds of
intervention beginning with who Herbert
Hoover held and helpless and then
amplified by Franklin D Roosevelt so in
terms of you looking at that what
happened as a matter of fact again there
was no there was no Federal Reserve
prior to 1914 the Federal Reserve was
created in order to one cut back cut
back on bank failures reduce
inflation and prevent deflation all of
those things reached historic highs
never seen before under the Federal
Reserve so I thought the idea was
wonderful it's only the reality that
didn't cooperate Oh Tom I'm only
laughing because otherwise I'd cry the
international scene you've just said
that under the right policies the
economy could recover quickly under the
right policies how quickly could how
quickly could let's just posit that you
become president hmm
how quickly does the international
damage done by your favorite Barack
Obama how quickly could that be recouped
how quickly could the United States and
the world dot dot that's a tough one
because whoever comes in there he's got
to face the damage that has been done
and the further damage that has already
been set in motion and you know you
don't one of the reasons we won the Gulf
War was far fewer casualties than anyone
ever expected the first Gulf the first
one right
is that Ronald Reagan bequeathed to
George Bush 41 a huge military
establishment so as you could send all
this stuff in and just wipe out the
other opposing army whoever inherits
this situation is going to be one where
it's just the opposite where we've had
reductions in the armed forces we've had
cutbacks in all kinds of research and so
on and straining so what's what what
what the next president has to offer to
operate with is going to be just a very
desperate situation where does Tom souls
stand on immigration I guess there's no
such thing as a policy toward immigrants
because there's no such thing as just an
immigrant there are immigrants from
different places different kinds of
immigrants and we don't even want to
discuss any of those things you know 100
years ago they were talking about
immigration they have all kinds of data
on crime rates death rates everything
you can think of about immigrants from
various countries around the world we
have no one even dares to ask such
questions today so the country in the
old days had the self-confidence to pick
choose oh absolutely we'll take some
from here but not from there yes and
that's what you'd like to see yes and
what would be the principles we would
accept immigrants who would do us
economic good economic good and
presumably uh preferably not not none
not plant explosives in various places
with you okay that the minimum the
minimum hurdle single family a
single-parent family the family
breakdown is that is that reversible if
it's the result of the welfare state if
we were somehow or other to get rid of
the welfare state with the family in
effect heal itself or is it one of those
social constructs that once unraveled
takes generations to put back would take
it would take time but even the modest
welfare reform under the Clinton
administration led to people more people
actually going to work once the gravy
train wasn't there so that too all right
all right all these things are all these
things are achievable yeah all we have
to do is stop doing the wrong thing yeah
we have to stop being stupid well you
could put it that way all right a couple
of last questions we're taping this the
week before Pope Francis visits the
United States Pope Francis in a 2013
statement some people continue to defend
trickle-down theories which assume that
economic growth encouraged by a free
market will inevitably succeed in
bringing about greater justice and
inclusiveness in the world this opinion
which has never been confirmed by the
facts expresses a cruel expresses a
crude a naive trut will you please stop
interrupting this is not ponte a crude a
naive trust in the goodness of those
wielding economic power and in the
sacralized workings of the prevailing
economic system close quote is there
anything you'd like to say to the
pontiff uh I would say reread my
monograph on trickle-down theory there
is no such theory it there were some
years ago in one of my columns I defy
anybody to name any economist of any
school of thought outside of an insane
xylem who had ever advanced that theory
I pointed out that the Joseph champagne
is 1206 a 60 page book on the history of
economic analysis printed in very small
letters you know has no mention of any
trickle down there is no such theory
it's a straw man has been created and
it's pathetic
that someone in the position of the Pope
would spout off about this I would say
to him with what I would say to anyone
else you shall be that theory and I and
you know I'll give you $1000 a down
payment on tort or someone's general
suspicion toward capitalism some way in
oppressive well again if he if he has
any facts I'd be delighted to hear them
all right you know what what is what is
so frustrating to me is that we've
gotten away from facts and evidence not
some time back someone did a paper
disproving something I said in 1970 now
no one likes to be a found wrong I was I
was actually pleased with it it was one
of the few times someone's come over any
facts to even bring into the argument
last question as I said you titled the
last section of this book implications
and prospects no I tried lit epilogue
epilogue excuse me you titled the
penultimate section I'm showing off that
means next to last question the
penultimate section is implications and
prospects so question about the prospect
for the American experience
experiment we hear a great deal about
the United States current condition is a
new normal sluggish growth high
unemployment high unemployment in this
end of the unemployment rate per se is
now down to a little over 5% but if you
take into account people who've dropped
out of the word horse difficult to say
for certain but it's still very very
high possibly even in double-digit still
lowest labor force participation rate
since 1977 so that's where we are and we
have this general sense that the United
States is losing ground or ceding ground
internationally that's the new normal to
paraphrase Ronald Reagan four years from
now will the country be better off
it depends what is what they decide next
makes no ever so you don't have some
kind of underlying faith in American
democracy I think I think anyone who has
watched the so-called debates would it
would find it hard to have much faith
all right now you mention 1977 things
were terrible then note how quickly they
turned around when Reagan took office
for example Iran released our hostages
within hours of Reagan's inauguration
okay thank you because I like to end
shows on an optimistic note on you just
gave me one Thomas sole author of wealth
poverty and politics thank you
for uncommon knowledge and the Hoover
Institution I'm Peter Robinson